ADR: React project files and directories names conventions (#9)
straw-hat-team/adr: adrs/5541831634/README.md

# React project files and directories names conversion

* **State:** Draft
* **Created:** 2020-12-01
* **Tags:** react

## Context

Across the ecosystem, we can find all sorts of files and directory naming
conventions in React projects.

The variety of conventions causes misalignment and shifts focus away from more
important matters.

Although there are no silver bullets for this topic, committing to a convention
will reduce cognitive load by triggering pattern recognition, enabling engineers

> to focus their brainpower on their tasks.

Reviewer: I agree with this!  In my lifetime Prettier has been the most effective org/tool making this point.  They spell it out in their intro docs: https://prettier.io/docs/en/why-prettier.html#building-and-enforcing-a-style-guide

> By far the biggest reason for adopting Prettier is to stop all the on-going debates over styles. It is generally accepted that having a common style guide is valuable for a project and team but getting there is a very painful and unrewarding process. People get very emotional around particular ways of writing code and nobody likes spending time writing and receiving nits.

Reviewer: It'd be really dope if we had tooling like Prettier or ESLint to help automate and enforce a file structure style guide.

Author: I will be working in some CLI that would help us as well

## Resolution

* You **must** follow [NodeJS files and directories names conversion](./../3122196229/README.md)

> * You **must** use `<rootDir>/src/@types` to store TypeScript definition files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You **must** use `<rootDir>/src/@types` to store global TypeScript definition files.
```

Maybe global isn't the right word... But we should draw distinction with `<fractalDir>/types`

Author: I think I spelled out the right term, it is a matter of understanding TypeScript lingos.

TypeScript Definitions files are the ones that use `*.d.ts` suffix, maybe suggest adding `(.d.ts)` to clarify.

Reviewer: Good idea

* You **must** use `<rootDir>/src/app.tsx` to be your application root
  component.

### NextJS

Some resolutions are related to NextJS projects.

* You **must** use `<rootDir>/src/pages` for [NextJS Pages](https://nextjs.org/docs/basic-features/pages)
  directory.
* In NextJS project, you **must** re-export a NextJS app from
  `<rootDir>/src/app.tsx` in `<rootDir>/src/pages/_app.tsx`
* In NextJS project, you **must** re-export a NextJS Documents from
  `<rootDir>/src/document.tsx` in `<rootDir>/src/pages/_document.tsx`
* In NextJS project, you **must** re-export a NextJS Documents from
  `<rootDir>/src/error.tsx` in `<rootDir>/src/pages/_error.tsx`

> ### Fractal pattern directories and files

Reviewer: Do you make a distinction between small, one-off micro frontends VS large SPA clients?   

Personally, I wonder if the need for the fractal pattern is a signal that you're shoving too much stuff into a given React app.  Another way to say that,  if you're building a small one-off client this directory structure seems like overkill.

Author: There are no differences between micro-frontend and large SPA,

Even when could be overkilling for a two-pages micro-frontend, the reduction of cognitive load still there, I rather have familiar code than go back to the problem statement.

This reminds me of Elixir projects vs Erlang folks, even when there is no point in adding `lib` directory and everything could be at the root (as Erlang does it), that one directory helps a shit ton to know where to start navigating the source code.

- Elders say: don't bother in adding a directory, no point, why that stupid lib directory.
- Millennials say: it matters to us, I do bother.

There is no right answer, all depends on your target audience.

That being said, objectively speaking, none of these matter to me, I can figure it out given enough time and resources, subjectively speaking. But that is exactly what I don't want, having to rely on people's experiences and having available resources to do my job.

Does that make sense?

## Routes directory structure

### Web

* `<rootDir>/src/routes/index.tsx` **must** be used as the root path
  of the URL.

  ```text
  URL: http://acme.io/
  <rootDir>
  └── src
      └── routes
          └── index.tsx
  ```

* URL subpath **must** must match a subdirectory inside `<fractalDir>/routes`.

  ```text
  URL: http://acme.io/authors/articles
  <rootDir>
  └── src
      └── routes
          ├── authors
          │   ├── index.tsx
          │   └── routes
          │       └── articles
          │           └── index.tsx
          └── index.tsx
  ```

* Dynamic URL subpath **must** must match a subdirectory inside
  `<fractalDir>/routes` using `[the dynamic section identifier]` syntax. In case
  you use NextJS, you must use the same name as the dynamic NextJS route
  directory.

  ```text
  URL: http://acme.io/authors/articles/:articleId/
  <rootDir>
  └── src
      └── routes
          ├── authors
          │   ├── index.tsx
          │   └── routes
          │       └── articles
          │           ├── index.tsx
          │           └── routes
          │               └── [articleId]
          │                   └── index.tsx
          └── index.tsx

>   ```

Reviewer: Love it

  component.

### NextJS

Some resolutions are related to NextJS projects.

* You **must** use `<rootDir>/src/pages` for [NextJS Pages](https://nextjs.org/docs/basic-features/pages)
  directory.
* In NextJS project, you **must** re-export a NextJS app from
  `<rootDir>/src/app.tsx` in `<rootDir>/src/pages/_app.tsx`
* In NextJS project, you **must** re-export a NextJS Documents from
  `<rootDir>/src/document.tsx` in `<rootDir>/src/pages/_document.tsx`
* In NextJS project, you **must** re-export a NextJS Documents from
  `<rootDir>/src/error.tsx` in `<rootDir>/src/pages/_error.tsx`

### Fractal pattern directories and files

A fractal pattern is a pattern that you could repeat in each nested level
directory. The pattern repeated in `<rootDir>/src`, `<rootDir>/src/components`
or `<rootDir>/src/routes/`.

* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/routes` for managing the entry point of a
  route.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/services` to store anything
  related to any communication with [external services](#external-services).
* You **must** use external service brand name as a subdirectory in
  `<fractalDir>/services/[service name]`.

> * You **must** use `<fractalDir>/components` to store reusable React

Reviewer 2: How about for views under components? Should this be a flat structure or is nesting of components under a directory of `/views/${component-name}/Component.${ts|js}.x` advisable?

Author: It is mentioned that the Fractal pattern is repeated under `<rootDir>/src/components/`, which means you can keep adding the fractal directory structure under `<rootDir>/src/components`.

Create directories, if you need to scope the content to a particular component or set of components. I updated the docs, let me know if that clarifies your concern or suggest a better wording 😄 

> Side note, make sure to read https://github.com/straw-hat-team/adr/tree/master/adrs/3122196229 since you are using PascalCase in your file name.

* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/helpers/datetime` to store anything related
  to Dates or Times. Except formatters, use `<fractalDir>/i18n/datetime`
  instead.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/helpers/currency` to store anything related
  to currency. Except formatters, use `<fractalDir>/i18n/numbers`
  instead.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/helpers` to store anything that does not
  fall into any of the other helper directory categories. You **may** create
  your own files and directories based on your context.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/transports/http` to store anything
  related to HTTP transport clients.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/transports/web-socket` to store
  anything related to Web Socket transport clients.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/transports/graphql` to store
  anything related to GraphQL transport clients.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/storages` to store anything related to the
  device. You **may** use `local`, `session`, `cookies`, `websql`, and
  `indexeddb` as subdirectories.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/schemas` to store anything related to Joi, Yup
  schemas or any similar package. You **may** use **joi**, **yup** or

>   package name as subdirectories.

Reviewer: The last thing that is on my mind with this: if the goal is to reduce cognitive load, this is too many rules. I'm just imagining having to consult a rule book every time I want to create a new file. 

I think having some sort of tooling to enforce these rules and guide developers is an essential prerequisite to successfully adopt an ADR like this.

Author: I agree it may seem that they are too many rules, but I don't think they are that many in practice, just that the write-up feels like that.

Although, it may take you a few hours, or hopefully only a few days to get used to it, once you have the pattern established you don't need to learn new things.

The intention is to bring long term value since obvious there is some short term cost.

important matters.

Although there are no silver bullets for this topic, committing to a convention
will reduce cognitive load by triggering pattern recognition, enabling engineers
to focus their brainpower on their tasks.

## Resolution

* You **must** follow [NodeJS files and directories names conversion](./../3122196229/README.md)
* You **must** use `<rootDir>/src/@types` to store TypeScript definition files
  (`*.d.ts`).
* You **must** use `<rootDir>/src/app.tsx` to be your application root
  component.
* You **must** use `<rootDir>/src/polyfills` to store polyfills.

### NextJS

Some resolutions are related to NextJS projects.

* You **must** use `<rootDir>/src/pages` for [NextJS Pages](https://nextjs.org/docs/basic-features/pages)
  directory.
* In NextJS project, you **must** re-export a NextJS app from
  `<rootDir>/src/app.tsx` in `<rootDir>/src/pages/_app.tsx`
* In NextJS project, you **must** re-export a NextJS Documents from
  `<rootDir>/src/document.tsx` in `<rootDir>/src/pages/_document.tsx`
* In NextJS project, you **must** re-export a NextJS Documents from
  `<rootDir>/src/error.tsx` in `<rootDir>/src/pages/_error.tsx`

> ### Fractal pattern directories and files

Reviewer 3: Haven't worked on a Nextjs project large enough to warrant something like this yet but I'm generally open to it. 
It would be sweet if there was an automated way to enforce the structure

  formatting. Read more about the intent at [Intl.NumberFormat](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl/NumberFormat).
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/i18n/plural` to store i18n
  pluralization formatting. Read more about the intent at [Intl.PluralRules](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl/PluralRules).
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/i18n/relative-time` to store i18n
  relative-time formatting. Read more about the intent at [Intl.RelativeTimeFormat](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl/RelativeTimeFormat).
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/helpers/datetime` to store anything related
  to Dates or Times. Except formatters, use `<fractalDir>/i18n/datetime`
  instead.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/helpers/currency` to store anything related
  to currency. Except formatters, use `<fractalDir>/i18n/numbers`
  instead.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/helpers` to store anything that does not
  fall into any of the other helper directory categories. You **may** create
  your own files and directories based on your context.

> * You **must** use `<fractalDir>/transports/http` to store anything

Reviewer 3: More specifically I'm concerned that the structure may be _too_ granular in separating the different types of code.
It reminds me a lot of how we used to separate `style`, `js`, `html` in the early 2010s
```
styles/
  article.css
js/
  article.js
html/
  article.html
```

and then started colocating them
```
Article.jsx
```

If the intention of this ADR is to have an exercise on documenting your personal opinion on what a NextJS structure should look like, this is fine.

If the intention of this ADR is to have an exercise on:
- teaching others how to think about organizing code
- teach others why this structure is superior
- getting buy-in then I recommend breaking this ADR up into smaller chunks 

IE: do I18n, services, and transports as separate ADRs and provide simple but tangible examples

I say this because generally when defining a standard as large as this from within the bounds of an organization the burden of proof is on the person who wants to introduce the large standard. In this case you are the organization owner so you have the authority to implement without currying buy-in.

Author: > More specifically I'm concerned that the structure may be too granular in separating the different types of code. It reminds me a lot of how we used to separate style, js, html in the early 2010s

From my experience, people still living in 2010 then, all depends on the toolkit you are using 😉 

> And then started colocating them

If you want to colocate things into a single file, by all means (for example people in CSS-in-JS land), do that.

In case you need to find directories to group things, then you have an answer.

Style files are colocated together to allow easier collaboration with designers or have a precise directory where you can manage the styles (it is a back and forward, in 2010 Bootstrap was the way, in 2020 Tailwind 🤷🏻  don't get cut up in the example).

> I say this because generally when defining a standard as large as this from within the bounds of an organization the burden of proof is on the person who wants to introduce the large standard. In this case, you are the organization owner so you have the authority to implement without currying buy-in.

If you feel this is not the appropriate ADR to follow for your organization, then don't follow it. All ADRs come with a cost, and writers can't assess the entire internet that would like to adopt it since they don't have the scope of it.

Greenfields projects are always easier to introduce such ADRs, this ADR is not assuming that work needs to be done, but rather have a common ground for incoming projects, or have a path forward with legacy applications.

It is hard to tell the situation of a particular organization.

> IE: do I18n, services, and transports as separate ADRs and provide simple but tangible examples

We could add some examples of it, but, it depends. Would prefer to write another ADR for particular ways to do things.

> teach others why this structure is superior

It is not, trade-offs are required, what matters is the alignment rather than being superior, such things are hard to quantify and justify objectively.

Reviewer 3: > Greenfields projects are always easier to introduce such ADRs, this ADR is not assuming that work needs to be done, but rather have a common ground for incoming projects, or have a path forward with legacy applications.

This is a helpful clarification.
I'd be happy to try this folder structure but it seems like the scope is so large that we'll inevitably need to make changes to it.

What's the process for amending ADRs?
Would we keep this in the `Trial` phase and then `Adopt` it after a few trials have occured?
Or would we go straight into `Adopt` and add additional ADRs to amend it?

Author: At the moment, you can replace an ADR as a way to amend it, if you will invalidate the ADR.

For the most part, it is a bad idea to update things but doesn't have to be like that, just that greater power comes with greater responsibilities.

  related to HTTP transport clients.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/transports/web-socket` to store
  anything related to Web Socket transport clients.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/transports/graphql` to store
  anything related to GraphQL transport clients.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/storages` to store anything related to the
  device. You **may** use `local`, `session`, `cookies`, `websql`, and
  `indexeddb` as subdirectories.

> * You **must** use `<fractalDir>/schemas` to store anything related to Joi, Yup

Reviewer 3: Part of me is wondering if this ADR reaches too far.
It seems to try to cover every possible usecase for a complex NextJS project.

Has this entire structure (ie: every subfolder listed here) actually been implemented in a project before?
If it has been implemented in a project before what was the outcome? 
How many iterations have been made on this structure?

I'm concerned that if this structure is being imposed without actually using it first we may inadvertently introduce complexity.

Author: The answer is yes, it has been used before.

If it is common nowadays to have validations for your forms using Yup, Joi, or some similar library, for example:

- https://react-hook-form.com/get-started#SchemaValidation
- https://formik.org/docs/guides/validation#validationschema

Those two packages are the most popular at the moment in the ecosystem for dealing with form.

As you noticed they called it schemas because those packages themselves call themselves "schema" for validating data. That is the name comes from.

The directory name is closer to what the terminology is being used for today.

Reviewer 3: I'm referring to all of the subfolders in the `fractal directory`
types, styles, contexts, transports, storages, schemas etc

Author: It depends, the intention of having directories for a particular group of things, yes, it is widely used.

1. Routing
2. Reusable components
3. Internationalization
  3.1 Numbers
  3.2 Dates
  4.3 Numbering things
  4.4 ...
4. Validations
5. Things that are hard to give a group (helpers)
6. Transport protocols
  6.1 HTTP
  6.2 GraphQL
  6.3 Socket
7. Dealing with devices storage

And many other things are commonly needed in apps, it may be the case that you wouldn't need all of them, but in case you do, you have a common ground.

This is leaving directories based on technology, which we could document as part of another ADR.

  schemas or any similar package. You **may** use **joi**, **yup** or
  package name as subdirectories.

## Routes directory structure

### Web

* `<rootDir>/src/routes/index.tsx` **must** be used as the root path
  of the URL.

  ```text
  URL: http://acme.io/
  <rootDir>
  └── src
      └── routes
          └── index.tsx
  ```

* URL subpath **must** must match a subdirectory inside `<fractalDir>/routes`.

  ```text
  URL: http://acme.io/authors/articles
  <rootDir>
  └── src
      └── routes
          ├── authors
          │   ├── index.tsx
          │   └── routes
          │       └── articles
          │           └── index.tsx
          └── index.tsx
  ```

* Dynamic URL subpath **must** must match a subdirectory inside
  `<fractalDir>/routes` using `[the dynamic section identifier]` syntax. In case
  you use NextJS, you must use the same name as the dynamic NextJS route
  directory.

  ```text
  URL: http://acme.io/authors/articles/:articleId/
  <rootDir>
  └── src

>       └── routes

Reviewer 3: Where would I put static data like markdown content files?

Author: It depends on what you mean by static data.

1. Are those markdown file [mdx files](https://mdxjs.com/)?
  11. Do they behave like a page? Then use `routes`
  1.2. Are they reusable across the app? Then use `components`

2. Are those markdown statics and don't need to be processed? If so use the `public` directory

# React project files and directories names conversion

* **State:** Draft
* **Created:** 2020-12-01
* **Tags:** react

## Context

> Across the ecosystem, we can find all sort of files and directories naming
> conversions in React projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Across the ecosystem, we can find all sorts of files and directory naming
conventions in React projects.
```

> That has caused misalignment, shifting the focus away from more important
> matters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The variety of conventions causes misalignment and shifts focus away from more important
matters.
```

Although there is no silver bullet for this topic, it helps create some
conventions that aim to reduce cognitive load based on patterns that trigger

> pattern recognition. Enabling engineers to perform their tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pattern recognition--enabling engineers to perform their tasks.
```

> Although there is no silver bullet for this topic, it helps create some
> conventions that aim to reduce cognitive load based on patterns that trigger
> pattern recognition. Enabling engineers to perform their tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although there are no silver bullets for this topic, committing to a 
convention will reduce cognitive load by triggering pattern recognition, 
enabling engineers to focus their brainpower on their tasks.
```

## Resolution

* You **must** follow [NodeJS files and directories names conversion](./../3122196229/README.md)
* You **must** use `<rootDir>/src/@types` to store TypeScript definition files.
* You **must** use `<rootDir>/src/pages` for [NextJS Pages](https://nextjs.org/docs/basic-features/pages)
  directory.

### Fractal pattern directories and files

A fractal pattern is a pattern that you could repeat in each nested level
directory. The pattern repeated in `<rootDir>/src`, `<rootDir>/src/components`
or `<rootDir>/src/routes/`.

> * You **must** use `<fractalDir>/routes` for managing the entry point of a
>   particular URL routing, or screen routing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/routes` for managing the entry point of a
  particular URL routing or screen routing.
```

* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/src/services` to store anything
  related to any communication with [external services](#external-services).
* You **must** use external service brand name as a subdirectory in
  `<fractalDir>/services/[service name]`.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/components` to store reusable React
  components.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/hooks` to store reusable React
  hooks.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/types` to store reusable TypeScript types.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/styles` to store components styles such as
  CSS or Stylesheets.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/constants` to store constants variables.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/contexts` to store React contexts definitions.

> * You **must** use i18n to store anything related to
>   Internationalization (i18n).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/i18n` to store anything 
  related to Internationalization.
```

* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/i18n/plural` to store i18n
  pluralization formatting. Read more about the intent at [Intl.PluralRules](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl/PluralRules).
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/i18n/relative-time` to store i18n
  relative-time formatting. Read more about the intent at [Intl.RelativeTimeFormat](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl/RelativeTimeFormat).
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/helpers/datetime` to store anything related
  to Dates or Times. Except formatters, use `<fractalDir>/i18n/datetime`
  instead.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/helpers/currency` to store anything related
  to currency. Except formatters, use `<fractalDir>/i18n/numbers`
  instead.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/helpers` to store anything that does not
  fall into any of the other helper directory categories.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/transports/http` to store anything
  related to HTTP transport clients.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/transports/web-socket` to store
  anything related to Web Socket transport clients.

> * You **must** use `<fractalDir>/transports/graphql` to store
>   anything related to GraphQL transport clients.
> * You **must** use `<fractalDir>/transports/graphql` to store
>   anything related to GraphQL transport clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/transports/graphql` to store
  anything related to GraphQL transport clients.
```

Duplicated

* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/storages` to store anything related to the

>   device.You **may** use `local`, `session`, `cookies`, `websql`, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  device. You **may** use `local`, `session`, `cookies`, `websql`, and
```

  `indexeddb` as subdirectories.
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/queries` to store anything related to
  React Queries.
  as subdirectories.

> * You **must** use `<fractalDir>/schemas` to store anything related to Joi, or
>   Yup schemas. You may use **joi** or **yup** as subdirectories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You **must** use `<fractalDir>/schemas` to store anything related to Joi or
  Yup schemas. You may use **joi** or **yup** as subdirectories.
```

## Terminology

### External services

> Any piece of software external to your application that requires some network
> boundary such as APIs, 3rd party tools (Google Analytics, Sentry), and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any piece of software external to your application that crosses some network
boundary such as APIs, 3rd party tools (Google Analytics, Sentry), and so on.
```
